Blog posts: a deep dive into a Go compiler bug fix (#803)
mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation: site/content/blog/2021-04-23-optimizing-go-compiler-2.md

---
title: "Fixing a bug in the Go compiler as a newbie: a deep dive (II)"
heading: "Fixing a bug in the Go compiler as a newbie: a deep dive (II)"
description: ""
summary: "The second part of this series of posts details the issue we are trying to fix. We are using one of the tools we learned in the first part, Static Single Assignment, to understand each and every line of the intermediate code generated by the compiler. We will even learn a tiny bit of assembly in the way."
slug: optimizing-go-compiler-2
date: 2021-04-23T12:01:00-05:00
categories:
    - "go"
author: Alejandro García Montoro
github: agarciamontoro
community: alejandro.garcia
---

> This is the second part of a series of posts on the compiler of Go. Make sure you have read [the first part](/blog/optimizing-go-compiler-1) before going on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the second part of a series of posts on the Go compiler. Make sure you've read [the first part](/blog/optimizing-go-compiler-1) before going on.
```

## Copy block

Once we have our values initialized, we can study the interesting instructions, those in block `b43`:

```
v18 (+7) = LoweredNilCheck <void> v7 v1
v29 (7) = InlMark <void> [0] v1
v152 (+8) = InlMark <void> [1] v1
v34 (+79) = MOVQload <uint64> v7 v1
v171 (+84) = MOVBstore <mem> v248 v34 v1
v168 (+85) = SHRQconst <uint64> [8] v34
v216 (+89) = SHRQconst <uint64> [40] v34
v180 (+91) = SHRQconst <uint64> [56] v34
v219 (88) = MOVLstore <mem> [1] v248 v168 v171
v243 (90) = MOVWstore <mem> [5] v248 v216 v219
v255 (91) = MOVBstore <mem> [7] v248 v180 v243
```

We can skip the first three lines, which are again formalities, and start on the one for the value `v34`:

```
v34 (+79) = MOVQload <uint64> v7 v1
```

Cool, our first real instruction, `MOVQload`! Now, what does that cryptic name means? The best way to know is to go directly to [its definition](https://github.com/golang/go/blob/7240a18adbfcff5cfe750a1fa4af0fd42ade4381/src/cmd/compile/internal/ssa/gen/AMD64Ops.go#L702):

```go
// load 8 bytes from arg0+auxint+aux. arg1=mem
{
	name: "MOVQload",
	argLength: 2,
	reg: gpload,
	asm: "MOVQ",
	aux: "SymOff",
	typ: "UInt64",
	faultOnNilArg0: true,
	symEffect: "Read",
}
```

> The data in this struct defines what the `MOVQload` instruction does; the corresponding code in assembly, `MOVQ`; its returning type, `UInt64`; or the number of arguments it receives, 2. The comment does a pretty good job explaining what the instruction does: it loads 8 bytes from the data pointed to by the first argument (plus some auxiliary arguments, if present, which we will see are constant numbers in square brackets) into the second, which should represent the memory. If we go back to our line,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data in this struct defines what the `MOVQload` instruction does; the corresponding code in assembly, `MOVQ`; its returning type, `UInt64`; or the number of arguments it receives, 2. The comment does a pretty good job explaining what the instruction does: it loads 8 bytes from the data pointed to by the first argument (plus some auxiliary arguments, if present, which we'll see are constant numbers in square brackets) into the second, which should represent the memory. If we go back to our line:
```

```
v34 (+79) = MOVQload <uint64> v7 v1
━━┓                           ━┓ ━┓
  ┗ we can see this            ┃  ┗ memory
    one as temp                ┗ src
```

> we now can understand that this loads the contents from the `src` argument (remember that `v7`represented`src`), into the memory we initialized at the very beginning (represented by `v1`). There are no auxiliary arguments, so we can safely forget about those! The result of this instruction is represented by the `v34` value, which we can understand as the `temp` variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We now can understand that this loads the contents from the `src` argument (remember that `v7`represented`src`), into the memory we initialized at the very beginning (represented by `v1`). There are no auxiliary arguments, so we can safely forget about those! The result of this instruction is represented by the `v34` value, which we can understand as the `temp` variable.
```

This first line of the block, then, seems perfectly fine: it loads the whole contents of the `src` array into memory (which is effectively the `temp` variable we defined in the code), and it does it with a single instruction. We can no longer optimize this.

> But remember that the original function did two things: first, it loaded the contents of the `src` array into a temporary variable, and then it stored those contents into the `dest` slice. We have already loaded the contents into memory with the line we discussed above, so the rest of the block should do the rest of the work: store those contents from memory into the `dest` slice (which was represented by value `v248`). Let's see the rest of the block again:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But remember that the original function did two things: First, it loaded the contents of the `src` array into a temporary variable, and then it stored those contents into the `dest` slice. We've already loaded the contents into memory with the line we discussed above, so the rest of the block should do the rest of the work: Store those contents from memory into the `dest` slice (which was represented by value `v248`). Let's see the rest of the block again:
```

```
v171 (+84) = MOVBstore <mem> v248 v34 v1
v168 (+85) = SHRQconst <uint64> [8] v34
v216 (+89) = SHRQconst <uint64> [40] v34
v180 (+91) = SHRQconst <uint64> [56] v34
v219 (88) = MOVLstore <mem> [1] v248 v168 v171
v243 (90) = MOVWstore <mem> [5] v248 v216 v219
v255 (91) = MOVBstore <mem> [7] v248 v180 v243
```

> See that the values defined in the second, third and fourth lines are used in the three last lines. Let's rewrite the block, simply replacing the values where they are used:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See that the values defined in the second, third, and fourth lines are used in the three last lines. Let's rewrite the block, simply replacing the values where they're used:
```

```
v171 (+84) = MOVBstore <mem> v248 v34 v1
v219 (88) = MOVLstore <mem> [1] v248 (SHRQconst <uint64> [8] v34) v171
v243 (90) = MOVWstore <mem> [5] v248 (SHRQconst <uint64> [40] v34) v219
v255 (91) = MOVBstore <mem> [7] v248 (SHRQconst <uint64> [56] v34) v243
```

> SPOILER: these are the lines that store to the slice what we just read into memory. As you can see, we are using four instructions instead of one, which is what we are going to optimize!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SPOILER: These are the lines that store to the slice what we just read into memory. As you can see, we're using four instructions instead of one, which is what we're going to optimize!
```

> But let's not get ahead of ourselves! To better understand what is going on here, we need to understand what `MOVBstore`, `MOVLstore` and `MOVWstore` do, as well as `SHRQconst`. The first set of instructions look quite similar to the one we already understand, `MOVQload`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But let's not get ahead of ourselves! To better understand what's going on here, we need to understand what `MOVBstore`, `MOVLstore`, and `MOVWstore` do, as well as `SHRQconst`. The first set of instructions look quite similar to the one we already understand: `MOVQload`.
```

We can study the first one, `MOVBstore`, as before, looking into [its definition](https://github.com/golang/go/blob/7240a18adbfcff5cfe750a1fa4af0fd42ade4381/src/cmd/compile/internal/ssa/gen/AMD64Ops.go#L703):

```go
// store byte in arg1 to arg0+auxint+aux. arg2=mem
{
	name: "MOVBstore",
	argLength: 3,
	reg: gpstore,
	asm: "MOVB",
	aux: "SymOff",
	typ: "Mem",
	faultOnNilArg0: true,
	symEffect: "Write",
}
```

> Again, the comment does a good job explaining what is going on. The instruction receives three arguments, and it stores a single byte from the memory pointed to by the first argument (plus the auxiliary arguments) into the second argument. The state of the memory is represented by the third argument. The `typ` of the struct tells us that what this instruction returns is the new state of the memory after the operation. In short, this instruction gets a single byte from a place in memory and store it somewhere else.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Again, the comment does a good job explaining what's going on. The instruction receives three arguments, and it stores a single byte from the memory pointed to by the first argument (plus the auxiliary arguments) into the second argument. The state of the memory is represented by the third argument. The `typ` of the struct tells us that what this instruction returns is the new state of the memory after the operation. In short, this instruction gets a single byte from a place in memory and stores it somewhere else.
```

```go
// Suffixes encode the bit width of various instructions.
// Q (quad word) = 64 bit
// L (long word) = 32 bit
// W (word)      = 16 bit
// B (byte)      = 8 bit
```

Knowing what we know about `MOVBstore`, it's clear what the others do:

-   `MOVBstore` stores a single **B**yte (8 bits, 1 byte)
-   `MOVWstore` stores a **W**ord (16 bits, 2 bytes)
-   `MOVLstore` stores a **L**ong word (32 bits, 4 bytes)

That's it, these operations simply store a fixed number of bytes from some place in memory to another place.

That leaves us with the last instruction: `SHRQconst`. We can do the same as before, and go straight to [its definition](https://github.com/golang/go/blob/7240a18adbfcff5cfe750a1fa4af0fd42ade4381/src/cmd/compile/internal/ssa/gen/AMD64Ops.go#L398) to know what it does:

```go
// unsigned arg0 >> auxint, shift amount 0-63
{
	name: "SHRQconst",
	argLength: 1,
	reg: gp11,
	asm: "SHRQ",
	aux: "Int8",
	resultInArg0: true,
	clobberFlags: true,
}
```

> It's a good ol' shift to the right! That is: an operation that takes a binary number, and shifts it to the right a specific amount of places, specified by the `auxint` argument (the constant integer we see in square brackets). If shifting to the left was the same as multiplying by a power of two, shifting a number to the right `n` places means halving it `n` times, which is equal to dividing it between `2^n`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's a good ol' shift to the right! That is: An operation that takes a binary number, and shifts it to the right a specific number of places, specified by the `auxint` argument (the constant integer we see in square brackets). If shifting to the left was the same as multiplying by a power of two, shifting a number to the right `n` places means halving it `n` times, which is equal to dividing it between `2^n`.
```

We have all the ingredients now:

> -   `MOVXstore` stores the contents from the second argument into the first one, with the amount of bytes moved depending on the prefix `X`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   `MOVXstore` stores the contents from the second argument into the first one, with the number of bytes moved depending on the prefix `X`.
```

> -   `SHRQconst` shifts the number in its only argument a number of places specified by the auxiliary argument, the number in square brackets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   `SHRQconst` shifts the number in its only argument a number of places specified by the auxiliary argument, the number in square brackets.
```

```
                   this L means 4 bytes        ┏ dest               temp ┓
                   ━━━━━━━━┳━━━━━━━━━━━        ┃                         ┃
                           ┃                ━━━┛                         ┗━━
     new                                                                               previous
state of ━┫ v219 (88) = MOVLstore <mem> [1] v248 (SHRQconst <uint64> [8] v34) v171 ┣━━ state of
  memory                                                                               memory
                                        ━┳━                          ━┳━
                                         ┃                            ┃
         ┏━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┓      ┏━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┓
           auxiliary argument to MOVLstore, so it           auxiliary argument to SHRQconst, so
           starts writing data one byte after the           it shifts the contents 8 bits to the
           memory pointed to by the second argument         right, effectively discarding them
         ┗━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┛      ┗━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━┛
```

> Now we're storing a **L**ong word (4 bytes) from the second argument, `(SHRQconst <uint64> [8] v34)`, into the memory pointed to by `v248`, which is `dest`. But we have the `[1]` auxiliary argument! So we don't write directly into the memory pointed to by `v248`, but one byte after that pointer: that is, the first byte of `dest` is left untouched, and we write contents from the second byte on. In terms of Go code, as we are storing 4 bytes, it means that we're writing to `dest[1]`, `dest[2]`, `dest[3]` and `dest[4]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we're storing a **L**ong word (4 bytes) from the second argument, `(SHRQconst <uint64> [8] v34)`, into the memory pointed to by `v248`, which is `dest`. But we have the `[1]` auxiliary argument! So we don't write directly into the memory pointed to by `v248`, but one byte after that pointer: That is, the first byte of `dest` is left untouched, and we write contents from the second byte on. In terms of Go code, as we're storing 4 bytes, it means that we're writing to `dest[1]`, `dest[2]`, `dest[3]` and `dest[4]`.
```

> But what 4 bytes do we write? That's what `(SHRQconst <uint64> [8] v34)` is telling us: we already wrote `temp[0]` in `dest[0]`, so it would make sense to read now from `temp[1]` on. And that's exactly what we are doing with the shift: as the auxiliary argument is `[8]`, that means that we are shifting the content of `v34` (or `temp`) to the right 8 bits. Those 8 bits are already in `dest[0]`, so we can safely discard them and only read the next ones: from `temp[1]` on. As `MOVLstore` is writing 4 bytes, that means that we are getting 4 bytes worth of data; that is: `temp[1]`, `temp[2]`, `temp[3]` and `temp[4]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But what 4 bytes do we write? That's what `(SHRQconst <uint64> [8] v34)` is telling us: We already wrote `temp[0]` in `dest[0]`, so it would make sense to read now from `temp[1]` on. And that's exactly what we're doing with the shift: As the auxiliary argument is `[8]`, that means that we're shifting the content of `v34` (or `temp`) to the right 8 bits. Those 8 bits are already in `dest[0]`, so we can safely discard them and only read the next ones: from `temp[1]` on. As `MOVLstore` is writing 4 bytes, that means that we're getting 4 bytes' worth of data; that is: `temp[1]`, `temp[2]`, `temp[3]`, and `temp[4]`.
```

> So that's it! That long, complex, full of arguments and auxiliary arguments instruction is simply doing this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So that's it! That long, complex, full of arguments and auxiliary arguments, instruction is simply doing this:
```

```go
dest[1] = temp[1]
dest[2] = temp[2]
dest[3] = temp[3]
dest[4] = temp[4]
```

That was a bit hard, I agree. But we already have everything we need to know, because the two following lines are structurally identical!

```
v243 (90) = MOVWstore <mem> [5] v248 (SHRQconst <uint64> [40] v34) v219
```

> This one stores 2 bytes (see the `W` prefix there?) into the memory pointed to by `v248` plus `[5]` bytes; that is, we write into `dest[5]` and `dest[6]`. And what we write is the content of `v34` (`temp`) shifted to the right `[40]` bits (or 5 bytes, as we have already copied from `temp[0]` to `temp[4]`). That's right, this line is doing the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This one stores 2 bytes (see the `W` prefix there?) into the memory pointed to by `v248` plus `[5]` bytes; that is, we write into `dest[5]` and `dest[6]`. And what we write is the content of `v34` (`temp`) shifted to the right `[40]` bits (or 5 bytes, as we've already copied from `temp[0]` to `temp[4]`). That's right, this line is doing the following:
```

```go
dest[5] = temp[5]
dest[6] = temp[6]
```

So this leaves us with the last line of the block! And you already know what will happen:

```
v255 (91) = MOVBstore <mem> [7] v248 (SHRQconst <uint64> [56] v34) v243
```

> Yup, we're simply copying the last byte from `temp` (skipping the first `[56]` bits, or 7 bytes!), into the `dest` slice (starting to write after `[7]` bytes, or 56 bits!). That's it, in terms of Go code, we are simply doing this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Yup, we're simply copying the last byte from `temp` (skipping the first `[56]` bits, or 7 bytes!), into the `dest` slice (starting to write after `[7]` bytes, or 56 bits!). That's it, in terms of Go code, we're simply doing this:
```

```go
dst[7] = temp[7]
```

> Wrapping up everything we've learned up until now, we are doing the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wrapping up everything we've learned up until now, we're doing the following:
```

slug: optimizing-go-compiler-2
date: 2021-04-23T12:01:00-05:00
categories:
    - "go"
author: Alejandro García Montoro
github: agarciamontoro
community: alejandro.garcia
---

This is the second part of a series of posts on the compiler of Go. Make sure you have read [the first part](/blog/optimizing-go-compiler-1) before going on.

In the first part of the series we learned what the issue is and the role of SSA and the rewrite rules in the Go compiler. Let's try and use what we know now to actually investigate the bug.

# The investigation

As we learned in the first part, the issue we need to investigate is that the generated code for the following function is not as optimized as it could be:

```go
import "encoding/binary"

func copyArrayToSlice(dest []byte, src *[8]byte) {
	_ = dest[8]                                // 1. bounds check
	temp := binary.LittleEndian.Uint64(src[:]) // 2. read the contents of the source array into temp

> 	binary.LittleEndian.PutUint64(dest, temp)  // 3. write the contents into the destiny slice

Reviewer 2: destiny slice is a really cool slice. Let's fix it ;)

Author: Oh man, we use the same word in Spanish for both destiny and destination :joy: Fixed in https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation/pull/803/commits/bcd613fd20785b2de630c486a25b70caa5dfc2fe, thanks!

}
```

Let's use our first tool, SSA, to understand what the compiler is generating. If we generate the SSA for the original function, `copyArrayToSlice`, and look at the `lower` phase, we'll see the following:

```
b1:

	v1 (?) = InitMem <mem>
	v7 (5) = Arg <*[8]byte> {src} (b.ptr[*byte], src[*[8]byte])
	v8 (?) = MOVQconst <int> [8] (b.cap[int], b.len[int])
	v9 (+6) = Arg <int> {dest} [8] (b.len[int], dest+8[int])
	v248 (84) = Arg <*byte> {dest}
	v153 (6) = CMPQconst <flags> [8] v9
UGT v153 → b43 b3 (likely) (6)

b3: ← b1

	v12 (6) = LoweredPanicBoundsC <mem> [0] v8 v9 v1
Exit v12 (6)

b24:
BlockInvalid (+83)

b25:
BlockInvalid (84)

b27:
BlockInvalid (85)

b29:
BlockInvalid (86)

b31:
BlockInvalid (87)

b33:
BlockInvalid (88)

b35:
BlockInvalid (89)

b37:
BlockInvalid (90)

b39:

> BlockInvalid (91)

Reviewer 2: I am wondering if it's really necessary to mention this part. This is just the raw output, and not really helpful in the context of the post. It can be redacted to save some space.

Author: I removed all the invalid blocks, but left `b3`, and added a brief explanation on what it does. See https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation/pull/803/commits/4c3766ee500569280e9b6282ac68aea9c3bc3e8d, thanks!

b43: ← b1

	v18 (+7) = LoweredNilCheck <void> v7 v1
	v29 (7) = InlMark <void> [0] v1
	v152 (+8) = InlMark <void> [1] v1
	v34 (+79) = MOVQload <uint64> v7 v1
	v171 (+84) = MOVBstore <mem> v248 v34 v1
	v168 (+85) = SHRQconst <uint64> [8] v34
	v216 (+89) = SHRQconst <uint64> [40] v34
	v180 (+91) = SHRQconst <uint64> [56] v34
	v219 (88) = MOVLstore <mem> [1] v248 v168 v171
	v243 (90) = MOVWstore <mem> [5] v248 v216 v219
	v255 (91) = MOVBstore <mem> [7] v248 v180 v243
Ret v255 (+8)
```

The interesting blocks are `b1`, which initialize the values with the arguments of the function, and `b43`, which makes the actual copy.

> ## Definition block

Reviewer 2: I'd suggest that this section on "Definition block" can be skipped. You are not really going line by line and explaining each and every aspect of everything. Just that this has the first and second argument. IMO - this can be condensed to just say that block `b1` just passes the params.

Let's take a closer look at the block where the values are initialized, `b1`:

```
v1 (?) = InitMem <mem>
v7 (5) = Arg <*[8]byte> {src} (b.ptr[*byte], src[*[8]byte])
v8 (?) = MOVQconst <int> [8] (b.cap[int], b.len[int])
v9 (+6) = Arg <int> {dest} [8] (b.len[int], dest+8[int])
v248 (84) = Arg <*byte> {dest}
v153 (6) = CMPQconst <flags> [8] v9
```

There are a couple of formalities there, such as representing the initialized memory with the value `v1`, but then we see how we define the arguments of the function:

```
v7 (5) = Arg <*[8]byte> {src} (b.ptr[*byte], src[*[8]byte])
```

`v7` is the second argument of the function, `src`, which is a pointer to an array of 8 bytes (remember that `src` was of type `[8]byte`).

```
v248 (84) = Arg <*byte> {dest}
```

> `v248` is the first argument of the function, `dest`, which is a pointer to bytes (we do not know the length here, as it was defined as a slice, which has a variable length).

Reviewer 2: It is not really a "pointer to bytes", it is a "slice header" - which is comprised of three things - the base address of the array, length, and capacity. That's what those three lines - v8, v9, v248 are I think. Anyways, I think it's perhaps simpler to just skip this section.

Author: I was going to remove the section per your previous comment, but then read this one and realized I had not understood this block completely. So, instead of removing the section, I now think I should actually expand it :blush:

But I need some help with this. Could you let me know if this makes sense:

```
v1 (?) = InitMem <mem>
```

Init memory, easy peasy.

```
v7 (5) = Arg <*[8]byte> {src} (b.ptr[*byte], src[*[8]byte])
```

This represents the `src` array. The `<*[8]byte> is the type. I *guess* `{src}` is the GCnode. But I'm not sure what `(b.ptr[*byte], src[*[8]byte])` is, actually. I don't even know what that `b` is.

```
v8 (?) = MOVQconst <int> [8] (b.cap[int], b.len[int])
```

I guess this has to do with the length of the slice. Are we simply storing an `8` into the slice capacity and length?

```
v9 (+6) = Arg <int> {dest} [8] (b.len[int], dest+8[int])
```

Again, not sure what this argument is. We have three `Arg` lines, but the function only gets two arguments. I think this has to do with the bounds check in the first line of the function, because `v9` is then used in the `CMPQconst` line to decide which block we're going to next, but I'm not sure what the exact meaning of this line is.

```
v248 (84) = Arg <*byte> {dest}
```

This is a pointer to where the *data* of the `dest` slice lives, right?

```
v153 (6) = CMPQconst <flags> [8] v9
```

Finally, we're comparing `v9` to 8 (?) Is `v9` the length of the slice, maybe?

Reviewer 2: I can probably guess some parts of it, but I am nowhere near an SME on this matter. Let me ping @josharian to lend some of his expertise on this.

```
v34 (+79) = MOVQload <uint64> v7 v1
━━┓                           ━┓ ━┓
  ┗ we can see this            ┃  ┗ memory
    one as temp                ┗ src
```

we now can understand that this loads the contents from the `src` argument (remember that `v7`represented`src`), into the memory we initialized at the very beginning (represented by `v1`). There are no auxiliary arguments, so we can safely forget about those! The result of this instruction is represented by the `v34` value, which we can understand as the `temp` variable.

This first line of the block, then, seems perfectly fine: it loads the whole contents of the `src` array into memory (which is effectively the `temp` variable we defined in the code), and it does it with a single instruction. We can no longer optimize this.

> But remember that the original function did two things: first, it loaded the contents of the `src` array into a temporal variable, and then it stored those contents into the `dest` slice. We have already loaded the contents into memory with the line we discussed above, so the rest of the block should do the rest of the work: store those contents from memory into the `dest` slice (which was represented by value `v248`). Let's see the rest of the block again:

Reviewer 2: temporal

Author: Same thing as with destiny/destination. We reuse a lot of words in Spanish, I guess, and that shows :joy: Fixed in https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation/pull/803/commits/bcd613fd20785b2de630c486a25b70caa5dfc2fe, thanks!
